{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1671\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww15080\viewh20400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 DATA MANAGEMENT SYSTEM\
\
\
1. Spreadsheet organization\
For this project we follow the principles of \'91tidy data\'92 as established by Hadley Wickham (Wickham 2014 J Stat Soft). I strongly recommend reading this paper as a starting point. The foundational principle of tidy data is that variables should always be in columns and observations in rows. Relatedly, the following problems should be avoided:\
\'97Column headers are values, not variable names\
\'97Multiple variables are stored in one column\
\'97Variables are stored in both rows and columns\
\'97Multiple types of observational units are stored in the same table\
\'97A single observational unit is stored in multiple tables\
\
In addition to these basic tidy principles from Hadley Wickham, I will add two others:\
\
1a. Raw data should be entered and stored in raw data spreadsheets, but calculated data should be calculated using code and stored in separate spreadsheets generated from the code. This will likely seem to be the most unfamiliar to biogeochemists in part because raw data for one assay can depend on calculated data from previous assays. There will be some adjustment to having to generate raw data, run a script to calculate new data and generate a new file, and then use those new data to start the new assay. However, we feel that the benefits of this approach are worth it. There are two main advantages: 1) it helps cut down on cluttered data files with many columns of subsequent calculations; 2) it helps cut down on human error in generating calculations; 3) it allows you to generate many calculations (through code) that you wouldn\'92t necessarily want to create as separate columns in a spreadsheet, for instance looking at the difference between moisture content at 50 vs 65 vs 75 percent water holding capacity.\
\
1b. Do not create Excel files with multiple tabs. Each spreadsheet should be saved as a .csv, so it can be read across platforms. Multiple tabs from excel files should be stored as separate files.\
\
1c. Every sample should have a unique ID code. This should be a code that refers to both the project and where the sample is from within the project. This makes it much simpler to merge data sets then having multiple variables that uniquely define an observation.\
\
\
2. Variable and file naming\
Following from above, variables should always have names that are not numeric values. To make variable names standardized and clear, we use the following variable naming system:\
\
2a. Variables that are raw, entered data should be named with dots instead of spaces. For instance, tin.mass instead of \'91tin mass\'92 \
2b. Variables that are calculated from raw data should be named without punctuation and capitalization used to clarify new words. For instance, gravimetricMoisture instead of \'91gravimetric moisture\'92\
2c. Data sets and files stored in a file structure should be named with underscores instead of spaces. For instance, soil_properties instead of \'91soil properties\'92.\
\
In addition, variable and file names should always be descriptive, and informative, while as short as possible.\
\
\
3. Variable units and metadata\
The units of the variables in a raw data set should NOT be added to the end of a variable name, nor should they be added in a separate row below the variable name. For each spreadsheet with raw data, there should be a supplementary meta-dataset that includes units. This meta-dataset should have the same name as the raw data set with metadata added to the end of the title. For instance, soil_properties_metadata. This file should be stored in a separate metadata folder. Any other metadata should also be added into this file, such as notes from the assay.\
\
The units of calculated data should be clearly documented in code, but not stored in the calculated data file. If you wish you can generate a metadata file for calculated data but this isn\'92t strictly necessary if the units and other metadata information are clearly documented within the code.\
\
\
\
References\
\
Wickham, H. 2014. Tidy Data. Journal of Statistical Software 59 (10).}